---
layout: post
title: Morality of Machiavelli’s “The Prince”
date: 2016-10-28 20:30:54 +0400
categories: political
permalink: /post/2016/10/28/Machiavelli-Prince-Morality/
---
The morality of Machiavelli’s book has been discussed for quite long time already. There are various views of his book. In this essay, I argue that Machiavelli’s *The Prince* is an immoral book. For this purpose, we will look into three different aspects of his work. We will examine how some scholars argued the amoral view of Machiavelli's book, how Machiavelli advocated against good qualities and suggested to make use of immoral courses, and what are the shortcomings of the justification of national greatness for this immoral courses⁠. The discussion of these questions will prove the main claim of this essay. Furthermore, it will reveal Machiavelli’s hidden intentions of restoring Florentine republic.

Regarding the moral neutrality of Machiavelli’s book, we may claim that he did not write merely an amoral book. We can observe how he did not exhibited mere indifference toward moral rules, but also he advocated evil actions (Parkinson, 1955; Plamenatz, 1963). In Chapter XVIII of *The Prince*, initially we may have the impression that Machiavelli suggested “a defensive course” in the form of not keeping faith. It seems like he rationalized that it is meaningless to keep the promise, if others do not keep it since they are not good men. Parkinson (1955) argued that it may happen so that a promise is broken whenever the prince thinks it suits his purposes besides his mere needs. Moreover, it is argued that Machiavelli takes further what was suggested for not keeping promises, that is the prince is advised to break promises—even though others are preserving their promises—in a case, when it is advantageous for him (Parkinson, 1955). In other words, Machiavelli suggested the prince to pretend to be moral, but also be prepared to take immoral courses, if this will secure his princely rule.

It can be further proved how Machiavelli advocated against morality, that is the five good qualities:

>And I shall dare to say this also, that to have them and always __to observe them is injurious__, and that to appear __to have them is useful__; to appear __merciful, faithful, humane, religious, upright__, and to be so, but with a mind so framed that should you require not to be so, you may be able and know how to change to the opposite.

(*The Prince*, Chapter XVIII, my emphases)

On the other hand, Maureen Ramsay (2002) notes that Machiavelli intended to teach *virtù* in a different sense rather than preach “virtue” in its conventional sense. Other scholars, who believe in Machiavelli’s work being an amoral book, would argue so as well (Parkinson, 1955). The Machiavellian *virtù* supposes that the prince have to be brave, flexible, determined and prepared to break promises and act against qualities mentioned in the passage above (Parkinson, 1955; Ramsay, 2002). This is well illustrated with the example of fox and lion in the Chapter XVIII. Machiavelli stated that the prince needs to have both slyness of fox, and the strength of lion. The scholars of amoral view would argue that Machiavelli needs the slyness of fox in order to avoid the traps set against him, that is he is allowed to take “a defensive course”, which is irrelevant of moral rules (Parkinson, 1955). However we have to also notice that Machiavelli did not implied that the actions of prince should be estimated without taking into account morality. Parkinson (1955) argued that not only the skilled ruler needs not to be morally good man, but also there can even be a clash between politics and morality. The example of Agathocles from the Chapter VIII of *The Prince* proves this counterargument against amoral view of the book. In this example we see that the bravery and skillfulness Agathocles is regarded as praiseworthy, but his character of bad man—the lack of morality—is condemned.

We will examine one of the suggested courses for governing subjects in order to validate the immorality of Machiavelli’s means for reaching the end result, that is national greatness. In Chapter V, Machiavelli suggested that there are three courses existing for the prince to preserve the power of an acquired state, which previously enjoyed their own laws. The three means are (1) complete destruction of them, (2) residing there in person, and (3) extracting tribute and establishing an oligarchy there (*The Prince*, Chapter V). For our further discussion, we will proceed with the first suggested means. Machiavelli politically rationalized that “he who becomes master of a city accustomed to freedom and does not destroy it, may expect to be destroyed by it” (*The Prince*, Chapter V). He also assured that the safest way of preserving control over a such state is mass destruction. Here we can clearly see that Machiavelli advocated genocide. The issue with this crime is that it was subject of morality by his times already, and mostly religions were to prevent them. The term of “genocide” was coined by Raphael Lemkin and it was codified under Genocide Convention adopted by the UN General Assembly only in 1948. We know that Machiavelli was in support of keeping the religious institution of the state under the control of the prince (Scott & Sullivan, 1994). This would allow the prince override the moral rules set by the church. We may see quite the same image for the Armenian genocide. First, the Young Turks triumvirate regime tried to make the Ottoman Empire as secular as they could, thus, distancing the Islam, which was advocating to treat non-Muslims as brothers. Then they had suspicions that the Western Armenians would destroy them with the help of Russians, as Armenians had the experience of living under their own laws before. So, they decided to massacre the Armenians and other Christians living in Ottoman Empire. This may be regarded as one of the most notorious charges for advocating immorality against Machiavelli’s *The Prince*. By now it should be no wonder why his book earned the title of “wicked book” and Machiavelli was named “teacher of evil” (Maritain, 1942; Strauss, 1958).

At this point already, we may discuss how Machiavelli justified this and other immoral ways of achieving power and retaining it. This becomes quite clear after examining the following extract, where he stated:

>And as I know that many have written on this point, I expect I shall be considered presumptuous in mentioning it again, especially as in discussing it I shall depart from the methods of other people.

(*The Prince*, Chapter XV)

In the passage above, Machiavelli stated that he was not going to share methods of other people. These people most probably were the political thinkers of ancient times—namely Plato, Aristotle and others. If others were concerned with the question of what the men should be like, then Machiavelli questioned what the men is like. Thus, we may see that Machiavelli was not concerned with ideals, but reality (Lord, 1997; Plamenatz, 1963), or as Machiavelli wrote “...it appears to me more appropriate to follow up the real truth of a matter than the imagination of it” (*The Prince*, Chapter XV). The claims made in *The Prince* are not based on Christian morality, but on realistic approach, which would be practical for princely rule (Ramsay, 2002). His work was a fundamental change in political thought. It was him that shifted the course of modern approach to the secular one. The idiosyncrasy of Machiavelli’s work is his support and discussion of the human and profane, but not divine and sacred (Plamenatz, 1963). There is also debate that Machiavelli used political realism as a facade for hiding his immoral ways of attaining and preserving the control over a state (Dietz, 1986). For this reason, he introduced courses that seem to be practical to achieve national greatness. Leo Strauss (1958) argued that Machiavelli tried to reverse the conception of right and wrong rather than he was indifferent toward Christian morals. Thus, he created a “repulsive doctrine”, that is “the end justifies the means” (Strauss, 1958). Indeed, we can see how Machiavelli tried to advocate this doctrine in his work:

>...he [the prince] need not make himself uneasy at incurring a reproach for those vices without which the state can only be saved with difficulty, for if everything is considered carefully, it will be found that something which looks like __virtue, if followed, would be his ruin__; whilst something else, which looks like __vice, yet followed brings him security and prosperity__.

(*The Prince*, Chapter XV, my emphases)

In another critique, we see that Machiavelli was being criticized by readers for suggesting “do anything that reinforces power of the state and also extends it” (Plamenatz, 1963). Machiavelli’s idea was not only unacceptable in medieval times, but is unacceptable for most of us today. John Plamenatz (1963) thought that this made him the “the whipping-boy of philosophic statesmen”, as the Utilitarians for advocating “do anything that promotes happiness” with the same reasoning of achieving the end results have not been condemned⁠. Furthermore, it is argued that princes were misbehaving in any case, and that Machiavelli did not sought to spoil them, but just to find excuses for their misbehavior (Plamenatz, 1963).

However, it is important to take into consideration the historical context, when Machiavelli lived and wrote his book. Fortunately, there is general agreement among the scholars of different views that the nature of Machiavelli’s work should be discussed within historical context (Parkinson, 1955). The whole idea and purpose of *The Prince* will be perceived differently inasmuch we try to understand Machiavelli’s intentions within historical context. As we know Machiavelli was a senior official in Florentine republic, in particular, he was engaged in diplomatic and military affairs. After the change of powers, that is under the rule of Lorenzo de Medici, Machiavelli lost his office and was punished to be political writer (Ridolfi, 2009). Therefore, it will be quite reasonable to assume that he was a republican with anti-Medician sentiments. Furthermore, the examination of his other works reaffirm that he was republican and expressed republican views. A relatively recent critique of Machiavelli’s *The Prince* claims that it was a work of political deception with republican intentions, that is its intent was to jeopardize the Medici rule in order to restore republican order in Florentine (Dietz, 1986). Mary Dietz (1986) assumes that if the advice by Machiavelli were followed by Lorenzo, that is he got “trapped” in her words, then it would be possible to overthrow him and re-establish the Florentine republic. She claims that Machiavelli deliberately advises the prince to mistreat the people of the acquired state, to arm the people and to move there himself in order to raise anti-Medician sentiments, give the people capacity for revolution and make himself more accessible for being overthrown. This hypothesis of “trapping the prince” seems to be refuting the other viewpoint mentioned earlier that Machiavelli’s aim was to think of excuses for misbehavior of the princes. This hypothesis further reaffirms that Machiavelli was advocating ill-mannered and immoral courses, which have the capacity of undermining the princely rule. This hypothesis may also be confirmed by observing Chapter XXVI of *The Prince*, where Machiavelli stated that the princely rule is just a means toward the liberation of Italy and not an end itself (Parkinson, 1955).

It will be quite reasonable to conclude with following claims and observations. Firstly, his book is not just a morally neutral work and Machiavelli was not indifferent toward moral rules. This is shown by critical discussion of arguments for the amoral view of Machiavelli’s *The Prince*. Secondly, it is shown that Machiavelli suggested a number of genuinely immoral ways of gaining and preserving power. This is validated by examination of the extract of his book that advocates against virtues, that is the five good qualities. Furthermore, one of the courses suggested by Machiavelli for preserving the control over an acquired state is analyzed. The result shows that the means suggested for achieving and retaining power are politically rationalized besides the fact of their immorality. Finally, we discuss how Machiavelli justified the immoral courses introduced in his book. Machiavelli is renown for his political realism, however, here we may observe that Machiavelli in the light of the realism and practicality advocated immoral actions. In doing so, he could persuade Lorenzo de Medici to misbehave and expose himself to threat. This proves that Machiavelli had hidden republican intentions and reinforces the main claim that *The Prince* was indeed an immoral book.

***

### References

Dietz, M. G. (1986). Trapping the Prince: Machiavelli and the Politics of Deception. *American Political Science Review*, 80(3), 777–799. https://doi.org/10.2307/1960538

Lord, C. (1997). Machiavelli’s Realism. In A. M. Codevilla (Ed.), *Niccolo Machiavelli* (pp. 114–123). Yale University Press.

Maritain, J. (1942). The end of Machiavellianism. *The Review of Politics*, 4(1), 1–33. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0034670500003235

Parkinson, G. H. R. (1955). Ethics and Politics in Machiavelli. *The Philosophical Quarterly*, 5(18), 37. https://doi.org/10.2307/2217044

Plamenatz, J. (1963). Machiavelli. *In Man and Society: Political and Social Theories from Machiavelli to Marx* (pp. 1–44). Longsman.

Ramsay, M. (2002). Machiavelli (1469–1527). In A. Edwards & J. Townshend (Eds.), *Interpreting Modern Political Philosophy: From Machiavelli to Marx* (pp. 21–40). Palgrave Macmillan.

Ridolfi, R. (2009). *The Life of Niccolò Machiavelli (Routledge Library Editions: Political Science Volume 26)*. (C. Grayson, Ed.). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203706046

Scott, J. T., & Sullivan, V. B. (1994). Patricide and the Plot of The Prince: Cesare Borgia and Machiavelli’s Italy. *American Political Science Review*, 88(4), 887–900. https://doi.org/10.2307/2082714

Strauss, L. (1958). *Thoughts on Machiavelli*. University Of Chicago Press.
