---
layout: post
title: "Armenian and Rwandan Genocides in Comparison: Employing Structural Approach to Explain Some of the Causes"
date: 2016-12-02 23:32:27 +0400
categories: political
permalink: /post/2016/12/02/Armenian-Rwandan-Genocide-Comparison/
---
Genocides are crimes against humanity that are still happening in the world, where all kinds of measures—condemnation in international tribunals, military interventions, international coverage by media—are used in order to prevent them, but the practice shows that these measures do not always succeed. Another way of prevention is the study of genocides by scholars. The purpose of genocide studies is not only merely limited to the adding knowledge with the study of another social phenomenon, but to help to prevent them by understanding their nature as it has been already made clear. For this reason, a number of researchers concentrated on the study of the causes of genocides. In this essay, an attempt will be made to review some of the causes of genocides from the perspective of comparative analysis. Moreover, a methodological issue is addressed and critically analyzed as well as a hypothetical solution is proposed and applied to the comparison of the Armenian and Rwandan genocides.

There seems to be no general agreement among the scholars of comparative genocide studies on the definition of genocide (Hiebert, 2008; Straus, 2007). This phenomenon is explained by the fact that genocides are events that occur quite rare and not always under the same conditions. Thus, many researchers—especially the ones carrying out comparative research—preferred not to invest much effort to explain the concept of genocide because of the discussion of quite different instances of genocidal violence involved in their research (Straus, 2007). Taking into account the challenges regarding the concept in question, it would be reasonable to proceed with the definition from the UN Genocide Convention. In Article 2 of the Convention, the genocide is defined as “acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnic, racial or religious group” (UN General Assembly, 1948). The convention is ratified by 147 countries at present, which makes this definition mostly acceptable at least in the international politics.

Despite the legal nature of the definition above, it is convenient to use it in this essay for another practical reason as well. It reflects some of the main aspects of the structural approach quite well, which will be employed in this paper for the comparative study. Hiebert (2008) emphasizes the importance of structural factors such as regime type, societal cleavages, crises in this approach. The societal cleavages are the ones reflected in the definition to be more specific. The severe national, ethnic, racial or religious discrimination—the idiosyncrasies of societal cleavages—correspond to the intent of destruction of “national, ethnic, racial or religious groups” stated in the definition of the Convention. Besides structural approach Hiebert (2008) also distinguishes two other categories of theories explaining the causes of genocidal violence. They are the agent-oriented approach and the approach considering identity construction processes. It is worth mentioning that this categorization into three aspects is not a strict division into disciplines, but an attempt to sort theories according to their priorities of the determinants of genocide (Hiebert, 2008). He states that a factor from any of the other two categories may be a condition of equal importance as the ones from the primary category of a study.

Having clarified the theoretical base for the comparative genocide study, its practical applications in academia should be discussed at this point. Straus (2007) argues that best practice of comparative genocide study based on structural approach is comparing two extremely similar countries, where only one of them experienced genocidal violence. In this way, we may look for and find structural differences between these countries. These differences—found in the country that faced genocidal violence—may be regarded as potential factors causing genocides (Straus, 2007). Uvin (1999) used this kind of logic to carry out comparative genocide research even earlier, yet it was not as methodologically and theoretically advanced back then as it is at present. In his research, he compares two similar African countries, that is Burundi and Rwanda, and attempts to discover the historical processes for divergent developments in these countries. Both of the countries had almost the same political, economic and social characteristics, but their history developed in different ways—genocide in Rwanda and civil war in the other case (Uvin, 1999). However, we have to note that this does not mean that the factors found with the use of this logic *necessarily* lead to genocidal violence. For maximizing the generalizability of the factors found with this strategy, I propose a hypothetical solution. I argue that if the factors causing genocidal violence—previously found with the method suggested by Straus (2007)—are also found in a pair of countries, that faced genocide and are almost completely different, than the generalizability of the factors increases.

This solution also justifies the selection of cases for comparative analysis in this essay. For the analysis, I will use the Armenian and Rwandan genocides. These instances of genocides took place under almost completely different circumstances, that is there were different political, social, economic and historical conditions. On the background of this dichotomy between these two cases, I will make an attempt to find similar structural factors and processes. For this purpose, I will use some of the narratives of the prior in-depth single case studies of structural factors causing each of these genocides.

Presently I will focus on similarities alone—assuming that everything else is almost completely different. From structural factors, regime type seems to be quite a significant condition for these genocides. In the case of the Armenian genocide, the Ottoman Empire switched to constitutional monarchy in 1908 with the Young Turk Revolution. In Rwanda, there was a shift from the colonial status to a republic in 1962 after its independence from Belgium. These events created opportunities for the political participation of all factions of the society in both of the countries. There were also Armenians represented in Ottoman Empire mejlis—even from Armenian Revolutionary Federation and Armenian National Movement parties. We may observe that there was an ethnic divide among parties (Dadrian, 1999). The same kind of image may be observed in Rwanda; two ethnic groups—Hutus and Tutsis—were divided in Rwandan politics as well. This societal cleavage was so strong that there were hatred and discrimination against the victim group. For instance, the Armenians in Ottoman Empire were verbally dehumanized by Turks. As testified by Ambassador Morgenthau, Turks in their popular discourse often compared the Armenians with their domestic animals, or elites used pseudo-medical terms to speak of cleansing Turkey from them (Morgenthau & Balakian, 2003). These cleavages were particularly significant after the coup d’etat of 1913, when Committee of Union and Progress (CUP) came to power, and rest of them in politics turned into opposition including the Armenians due to their inclination toward Freedom and Accord Party. The ruling triumvirate from CUP found that the best solution would be the genocidal killings of the Armenians in order to neutralize them. Obviously, this structural factors—regime type change, societal cleavages and the crisis of 1913—were not and could not be the sole cause of the Armenian genocide, but they summed up to the other reasons in the calculations of the triumvirate leadership (Dadrian, 1999). In the case of Rwanda, we see that Hutu-dominated government decided that the most “efficient” solution would be taking on genocidal violence against the opposition, which mainly consisted of Tutsi minority (Roessler, 2005). We have to note also that the Rwandan genocide took place in the context of Rwandan Civil War. Thus, we may find quite the same composition of structural factors responsible for the genocides, that is regime type changes towards more inclusive, social cleavages, and crises.

It would be quite reasonable to conclude my essay with following thoughts and claims. The structural factors—regime type, societal cleavages, crises, institutions, etc.—may indeed help to create the necessary environment for genocidal violence. The scholars of comparative genocide studies have attempted to show this conclusion by comparing two similar countries, where one of them did not experience genocide. The rationale of this method is to identify the structural factors by finding differences in this pair of countries. However, as I discussed, this approach has the potential of leading to faulty generalization. As a solution for increasing the generalizability, I suggest attempting to identify the structural factors, which were found with the method mentioned above, in a pair of countries, that faced genocidal violence and were almost completely different. It is also worth mentioning that a rigorous research of structural factors causing the genocides of Armenians and Tutsis was not carried out within the framework of this essay, and most of the information was borrowed from single case studies for each of the genocides.

***

### References

Dadrian, V. (1999). *Warrant for Genocide: Key Elements of Turko-Armenian Conflict*. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.

Hiebert, M. S. (2008). Theorizing Destruction: Reflections on the State of Comparative Genocide Theory. *Genocide Studies and Prevention*, 3(3), 309–339. https://doi.org/10.3138/gsp.3.3.309

Morgenthau, H., & Balakian, P. (2003). *Ambassador Morgenthau’s Story*. Wayne State University Press.

Roessler, P. G. (2005). Donor-Induced Democratization and the Privatization of State Violence in Kenya and Rwanda. *Comparative Politics*, 37(2), 207–227. https://doi.org/10.2307/20072883

Straus, S. (2007). Second-Generation Comparative Research on Genocide. *World Politics*, 59(3), 476–501. https://doi.org/10.1017/S004388710002089X

UN General Assembly. (1948, December 9). Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. Treaty Series, United Nation. Retrieved from https://treaties.un.org/doc/publication/unts/volume 78/volume-78-i-1021-english.pdf

Uvin, P. (1999). Ethnicity and Power in Burundi and Rwanda: Different Paths to Mass Violence. *Comparative Politics*, 31(3), 253–271. https://doi.org/10.2307/422339
